[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Newtonian physicists
emphasize that a body made out
of matter can only respond
to material chemical signals,
such as drugs.
In contrast, quantum
physics acknowledges
that energy signals
are profoundly more
effective in
controlling changes that
create biological behavior.
What does it mean to say that
genes are not self-actualizing?
I am your host, Bruce
Lipton, for this series
on inner revolution.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Let's talk about your
genes for a second.
Genes are not
self-actualizing, meaning
they're not capable of
controlling their own activity.
To understand how
life works, I'm
going to take you
back over 50 years ago
when I was doing experiments
on cloning stem cells in 1967.
Firstly, what is a stem cell?
Well, let's recognize
a simple fact.
A human body is made out
of 50 trillion cells.
During embryology,
the embryo cells
differentiate and create all
the structures and organs
of our body, however,
on a day by day basis,
we're losing up to hundreds
of billions of cells,
normal aging, normal attrition.
And so basically,
every day, if you're
losing that many cells,
how many days can you live?
The answer is, with
stem cells, you
can keep going day after day,
because the cells you lose
are replaced by stem cells.
Stem cells are actually
just embryonic cells.
In fact, that's what
we call them the moment
before you were born.
But the moment
after you're born,
that same embryonic cell is
now called a stem cell simply
because you're no
longer an embryo.
So I'm growing
stem cells and I'm
cloning them, which means I
simply put one cell in a Petri
dish all by itself and it
divides every 10 or 12 hours.
So first, there's
one cell, and then
10 hours later, two,
10 hours later, four,
and it keeps doubling,
8, 16, 32 cells.
After a week, I have 30,000
cells in the Petri dish.
But the most important
fact is this,
all cells came from
one parent cell.
Significance is I have 30,000
genetically identical cells
in my Petri dish.
Now, the experiment
is cool, because what
I did is I split the
30,000 cells into three
different Petri dishes.
All dishes have genetically
identical cells,
but what is different is
this, I feed each culture dish
a different culture medium.
Culture medium?
Culture medium is the
laboratory equivalent of blood.
That's what cells
normally live in.
So I create culture
medium to try
to match the
composition of blood.
Well, since I'm in the lab
and creating that medium,
I can also change some
of that composition.
Well, this is exactly what
I did in the experiment.
I created three different
versions of culture medium
by slightly changing the
chemistry of the culture
medium.
And guess what?
In environment A with
culture medium A,
the cells formed muscle.
In culture B with environment
B, the cells formed bone.
And in the third dish,
in environment C,
the cells form fat cells.
When you look at the results, a
profound question arises, what
controls the fate of the cells?
Most important point
is this, all the cells
are genetically identical.
The only difference
was the composition
of the culture medium, the
environment in which the cells
lived, and this led me
to a whole new track
of understanding.
Because recognize this,
at the very same time,
I was teaching medical
students the concept
of genetic
determinism, that genes
turn on and off,
and in the process,
control the character
of our biology.
And yet, in the
laboratory, genes
do not turn on and
off by themselves.
Genes are not, in this
case, self-actualizing.
Let's take a look at
a simple mechanism.
And I say simple,
because nature is simple.
It's humans that make
complexity out of it.
To understand a
simple mechanism,
I create a model with gears and
a motor, switch and a gauge,
and the gears represent
the mechanisms
that carry out a function.
The motor is a drive force
that causes the gears to move.
The switch, of course, turns
the mechanism on and off,
and the gauges feedback how
is the mechanism running,
very similar to
the gauges you have
on the dashboard of your car to
see how your car is performing.
If you understand
these basic subunits,
I can explain biology to
you using this simple model.
So to start with, let's talk
about the mechanism, the gears.
The gears are what
carry out the function.
Well, in biology, the
gears are proteins.
And there are over 100,000
different proteins,
each with their own
unique shape, that
comprise the structure of the
cells and of the human body.
And then the analogy,
to make it very simple,
is consider this, a Lego
protein molecule kit,
100,000 different
parts, it's how
you assemble the parts that
create the different versions
of cells.
So a skin cell uses
some of these proteins,
a muscle cell uses
some other proteins,
a nerve cell uses some
of those proteins,
plus additional proteins.
All cells are assembled out
of molecular building blocks
called proteins,
and that's where
the structure of those cells
in the body comes from.
But here's an interesting
point, proteins are actually
linear strings of
amino acids, something
like a string of pearls,
where each pearl represents
a different amino acid.
There are 20
different amino acids,
so you can string these pearls
together and create a string
with thousands of
amino acid beads.
And this creates a
protein filament,
so a protein filament
is a linear string.
And yet, you look
at the human body
with its all its
three-dimensional structure
and I say, well, if
proteins are strings,
why don't we look like a
bowl full of spaghetti?
And the answer is profoundly
important for this reason.
Each different type of
amino acids out of the 20
that are found in humans
have a different shape,
and they also have different
charges, electrical charges.
Some of them are
soluble in water,
and some are soluble in oil.
So the significance
is this, when
you make a string
of protein, which
is a string of amino acids,
it starts out as a string,
but if you look at that
string and recognize
a very simple fact, if some of
those amino acids are positive
and others are negative, what
would happen to that string?
And the answer is this,
positive attracts negative.
So as a result, the
string will fold on itself
to balance the charges.
Well, that is the
foundation of understanding
how a linear string
peptide actually forms
a three-dimensional molecule.
To show you that,
here is actually
an image of a peptide string
that has just been synthesized.
It's a linear string.
And guess what?
All over the surface
of that string where
the amino acids are, there
are different charges,
positive and negative charges.
Two light charges, when
they come together,
repel each other.
But two opposite charges,
when they come together,
attract each other.
So I say, oh, then what's
the relevance of this?
I say, once the protein string
is made, in 1/1000 of a second,
that string will self-knit into
a three-dimensional structure
by balancing the positive
and negative charges
along the string.
Wonderful.
Nature has created
self-knitting yarn.
A protein is created
as a filament,
and once its synthesized,
it will self-knit
into a three-dimensional shape.
And now, we have an insight
into the secret of life.
Well, the secret of life
isn't that profound,
that light should come in
here from the heavens above.
The secret of life
is profoundly simple.
Recognize this, each protein
has a three-dimensional shape
because of the
electrical charges
that are being balanced along
the filament that ultimately
cause the filament to knit into
that three-dimensional shape.
I said, so what?
I say, ah, but proteins can
bind to environmental signals.
And I said, well,
what does that mean?
I say, well, when a signal that
is complementary to a protein
shows up in the
environment, that
signal binds to the protein.
But if the signal
has a charge, then it
changes the charge
on the protein.
I go, yeah, but
what's the relevance?
I said, the protein
shape is based
on the distribution of charges.
So if the protein
changes its charge,
guess what, it re-knits.
And when that signal
binds to the protein,
causes the protein to change
from its original shape
and create a second
confirmation or shape.
You go, wow, that's
really pretty neat.
I go, no, you see, here's
the important part.
It is the movement
of the protein
that is utilized by the cell
to carry out work or functions.
Yes, movement creates behavior.
And so, basically, then
the body is made out
of structural proteins
that give us our shape,
but guess what,
these proteins can
change their shape, and
in the process, move,
and when they move, they
cause work to occur.
To illustrate how proteins
work and how they function,
I'm going to show
you a manufacturing
plant of an automobile.
Now, in this plant, there
are these giant red machines
that you see.
The red machines, like proteins,
have very specific shape
movements.
A protein moves this way, the
protein machine moves this way,
and if you line them up
and then activate them,
look what they do.
They create a car.
Guess what, there are no
people in this picture.
The whole car's being assembled
by these red machines, each
with very precise movements.
Line them up into an assembly
line and they create the car.
Well, on the nano scale,
the proteins in your body
are functionally equivalent
to the red machines we just
saw building a car.
And assemblies of proteins,
which are called pathways,
actually act in assembling
the structures that
create the body,
and move the body,
and help all the body functions.
So the body structure
is provided by proteins,
but the function
of the body is also
provided by proteins, proteins
responding to signals, changing
their shape, and the resulting
movement used to carry out
all the functions of life.
So now we have an understanding.
The structure of the
body is made by proteins,
but a force causes
these proteins to move,
and this force comes from
environmental signals.
So when we want to say,
how does life work,
we make a very simple
equation, proteins
plus environmental
signals equal behavior.
That's how life works.
So what kind of signals are
controlling our proteins?
Well, as previously mentioned,
in a Newtonian world,
Newtonian physics said proteins
are made out of matter.
They can only be affected
by other forms of matter,
hence, the
pharmaceutical company.
What are they making?
Drugs.
Yeah, but what are drugs?
Signals, signals to
control your biology.
So if your biology isn't working
correctly, taking a drug in
can create the action
that should return health
back to normal again.
However, in 1925, quantum
physics came into our world,
and quantum physics
said the material world
that we perceive is
actually an illusion,
that the whole universe is not
split into matter and energy,
the whole universe is actually
just made out of energy.
So how can we understand that
when you look at the world
and you see all
the physical things
and you can push on
things and feel things,
and then we find out all those
things aren't matter at all,
they're all energy, how does
that make any sense, especially
in a Newtonian
materialistic science world?
Well, the answer is this.
when we look at what
are called atoms,
there was a philosopher
by the name of Democritus,
and what did he show?
He said that the smallest parts
of the universe are uncuttable.
In Greek, uncuttable is atom,
so the name atom means that this
structure cannot be reduced
any further than it is,
the smallest particle
of the universe.
So atoms come in different
varieties, and sort
of like recipes, you can
add atoms and mix them
in different ways and
create different things.
So our perception of an atom
is small little physical
particles, but in 1895,
physicists said, wait,
there's something
inside those atoms.
And they looked inside
and what do they find?
Oh, they found there were
smaller things called electrons
and protons and neutrons.
And all of a sudden, they
were saying, oh my god,
so there's smaller particles.
Yeah, well, that was
valid until about 1915,
and around that time, physicists
had a different perception.
Because they said, what
are those smaller particles
made out of?
What's an electron made out of?
What's a proton made out of?
And what did they find?
They found that they were made
out of energy vortices, nano
tornadoes.
When they looked inside
the atom, guess what?
There was no matter in it.
So in 1925, when quantum
physics was established,
our vision of a
Newtonian material world
only was now challenged,
because now, we
live in an energy world.
Everything is made
out of energy.
And as I said, well,
how can you see
something that's
made out of energy,
because a characteristic of
energy is it's invisible.
So if I'm made out of
energy, how can you see me?
Well, interesting enough,
it's a trick of the light.
What do you mean?
Well, light ends
photons from its source,
and when the photon
hits the energy field,
it's reflected back so you
see the reflection of light.
What's really important?
You can't see me in
the dark, and when
you do see me in the light,
you're not really seeing me.
What you're seeing are photons
of light being reflected off
of my surface.
Underneath, just energy.
Nothing physical at all.
And I say, well, why is
this really relevant?
The answer is, because then,
it opens up to the fact
that what we perceive as
matter is not only influenced
by other forms of matter,
but because matter is energy,
it's also influenced by all
the energy fields around us.
So all of a sudden, this
says that the signals that
drive life don't have
to be chemical drugs,
and in fact, what
we understand now
is that the signals
as energy signals
are much more
efficient and much more
effective in controlling
protein changes
than are physical drugs.
Relevance is this, what sources
of energy do we know affect us?
Well, of course, there's outside
energies in the environment
that we live.
But more important is
this, consciousness
is an energy field.
Consciousness isn't
physical matter,
it is a consequence of
the action of nerve cells
manifesting an energy field.
And I say, why is that relevant?
Because it turns out
that consciousness
is one of the most vital
sources of controlling protein
behavior, that our
consciousness, our attitudes,
beliefs, and emotions
are not just random
experiences, but they actually
can impact the movement
and operation of our proteins.
And this becomes
profoundly important,
because it says our thoughts
are not just random,
but our thoughts are influential
in altering the proteins
in our body, which in turn
provide for our behavior,
and as we'll talk about
later in epigenetics,
actually are involved with
controlling gene expression.
And this changes the name of
the game, because no longer are
we victims of a material world,
because now, we recognize
that consciousness controls
our biology and the character
of our lives.
To get an idea of
energy and atoms
and how our thoughts
affect us, let's look
at a model of an atom.
What's the charge on an atom?
0, equal positive
and equal negative.
But when we look at the
distribution of the charges,
with the electrons
being negative
and the protons
being positive, here
in our model, what we
can see is the electrons
in this particular atom
are not evenly balanced.
There is an electron on
the right side of the atom,
and not one on the
left side of the atom.
The relevance is very clear that
the charges, although equal,
are not equally balanced.
So you say, so what
does that mean?
I say, well, if you bring a
volt meter up to this atom
and bring it on the right
side, the volt meter
will read negative.
If you move the volt meter
toward the positive side,
the volt meter is in the middle,
but if you move the volt meter
up towards the positive
side, of course,
then the volt meter
reads positive.
I go, wow, great.
I can see the charge
differences as I move
the volt meter around the atom.
Ah, but here's an
interesting story.
Atoms spin, just like tornadoes.
Point, I don't have to
move the volt meter.
All I have to do is hold
the volt meter still
and let the atom spin.
So in our model right
here, the atom is spinning.
One side is more negative
than the other side,
so one side is
blue in the picture
and the other side is red.
They balance, so no net charge,
but when the volt meter is on,
we can see as it spins
around, the volt meter
goes from positive to
negative, positive to negative.
I say, let's get a printout.
And when we get a printout
of that volt meter
reading, what do we see?
Waves.
Well, guess what,
this is exactly
the characteristic of energy.
Energy are invisible waves of
positive and negative charges
moving through space.
An atom is a generator
of electrical waves,
because as it spins, the
differences in charges
around the atom are reflected as
the ripples that are emanating
from that atom as it spins.
So the significance
is this, we've
gotten used to seeing atoms
as physical particles.
That's an illusion.
The physical realm that we
see is really an illusion.
In fact, Albert Einstein had
a very interesting quote.
He said, reality is
merely an illusion,
albeit a very persistent one.
The point is, what we see as the
material world is not material
at all.
It's all energy.
Now that we understand
that the atom is energy,
then our vision of an atom
as a physical particle
must be changed.
Atoms are actually like droplets
that hit the water and cause
ripples around them.
We'll consider the
droplet as the atom,
and the ripples surrounding
it are the energy spinning off
like a tornado.
And so all of a
sudden, it says then
atoms are giving off energy.
All things are
giving off energy.
Relevance?
All things made out of
energy are interconnected,
because energy doesn't
have borders like we
perceive in the physical realm.
Energies propagate
at long distances.
So you see me as this
physical structure here,
but if you could see
my energy profile,
there'll be waves of energy
radiating off, and guess what,
interfering or interacting
with other energy.
The point is simply this,
in a material experience
of the world, we see objects
as separate and distinct
from each other.
But in a quantum
physics understanding,
everything is energy and
everything is interconnected.
The universe is not made out of
two things, matter and energy,
it's a singularity.
Now comes a very
interesting component.
We are radiating energy
and we're absorbing energy.
And in fact, when you look at
the periodic table of elements,
what we also note is there's
something called the absorption
spectrum, and it says
that every element,
every atom of a
different type has
a unique vibrational frequency.
But then I said, energies
interact with each other.
For example, if raindrops
are falling on a pond,
and all the ripples are
forming from each raindrop,
the ripples merge and
connect with each other
and alter each other.
So energy doesn't just pass
through one form of energy
to another, energies can
interact with each other.
And to illustrate that, I want
to talk about interference.
Let's say two atoms exist.
Our conventional understanding
is that these atoms
are physical particles.
In a Newtonian expression,
when those atoms come together,
boom, they create
chemistry, and that's
what we see in the world.
But that's an illusion,
illusion of light.
Because the atoms aren't
physical, they're energy waves.
And the question is this,
then what's interacting?
Nothing physical.
Atoms interact because they're
energy waves interacting
with each other.
And this changes our whole
understanding of the world,
because it's not
physical on physical,
it's energy connected
to everything.
So now, I'm going to give
a very important insight
into the nature
of our vibrations.
Why?
Each human is made out
of atoms and molecules,
each human is vibrating
energy just like an atom,
radiating away.
Consider this simple experiment.
I take two rocks, exactly the
same size, exact same height
above the water, drop
them in the water exactly
the same time.
The result is the ripples
in the water, which
represent the energy, are
coming toward each other.
And the question
is, what happens
when two sets of ripples meet?
That's called interference.
I say, well, what happens when
two energies come together?
Well, I can show
you schematically.
So in my picture right
here, what you see
are the ripples on the
surface of the pond.
What is the net result
of the interaction?
The answer is simple, add
up the values of the waves.
And as you look at this and you
see the overlap, both of them
have the same high peak and
both have the same low valley.
And what you could see
is this, they add up.
Now, the high ripple
is not plus 1,
it's plus 2, because you
add both ripples together.
And the valley is minus 2,
so when the two small ripples
come together, guess
what they create?
A larger ripple.
The height of the
ripple is larger
because you're adding
the value of each wave.
I go, what does it mean
if the ripple is larger?
It means there's more power.
Simple point.
Drop a little rock into the
pond, you get a little ripple.
Drop a big rock in the
pond, you get a big wave.
The point is, the height of the
ripple or the wave is power.
This is called
constructive interference
because the two
energy waves are more
powerful than either source
waves when they come together.
Now, that sounds complicated.
I go, well, it does sound
complicated, but guess what,
all of you have
experienced this process
where energy that was in harmony
with you has connected with you
and you raised your energy,
but we called it good vibes.
Good vibes is a reflection.
You got more energy.
I say, where'd you get it?
Because you're interacting
with other energy
that's in harmony with you.
What if the ripples
are not in alignment,
so that I have the two
rocks, I drop them,
I drop one rock before
I drop the other rock,
and the point is this, as
this ripple is going up,
this ripple is going down.
When this ripple is going
down, this one's going up.
They're out of phase.
What happens when two out of
phase ripples come together?
Well, I show them overlapping.
The height of one is plus 1, the
depth of the other is minus 1.
I say add them up.
Plus 1, minus 1, 0.
Minus 1, plus 1, 0.
As you can see, the
line flattens out.
No energy at all.
So two energies can
cancel each other.
I say, well, that's
interference.
It's not constructive,
it's destructive.
I go, well, you've
experienced that as well.
When?
When you start to
feel bad vibes.
Bad vibes are information.
What are they telling you?
The energy of the
environment you're in
is canceling the
energy of your body.
How?
Life is energy.
If life gets canceled because
the energy is canceled,
you're going to die.
So guess what, good vibes, when
we're enhancing our energy,
tell us this is a good
place for us to go.
Bad vibes are information.
They're telling you wherever you
are, this is not safe for you
because your energy
is being canceled.
Humans use language.
All the other organisms
on this planet
don't have a
particular language,
they just read the energy.
An organism will move
toward any direction
where their energy is
enhanced, because that
enhances their life.
And if they move in
a direction and they
feel their energy being canceled
by destructive interference,
what do you think they do?
They turn around and
go the other way.
And the point is
this, all organisms,
and that includes humans, the
primary means of communication
is to read the energy fields,
because energy is life.
And if your field goes up,
you're going to enhance life.
If your field goes down,
your life is threatened.
And yet, most of us
have been programmed
not to go by our feelings
but to actually listen
to what the person is saying.
I go, that's the first big
mistake on this planet,
because anybody can say
any words they want.
Positive words,
they can make you
feel like you're going
to be a millionaire,
and they're ripping you off.
The most important aspect
of making any relationship,
whether it's with people
or objects or anything
in your world, is
to feel the vibes.
And this is profoundly important
as a compass to tell you
where you should
be in your life,
always moving toward positive
vibes, good vibes, higher
energy, more life.
Let me bring Albert
Einstein into the story,
because this quote is
most profoundly important.
"The field is the sole governing
agency of the particle."
The particle is matter.
Albert Einstein is
saying, the energy field
is the sole governing agency
of our physical expression.
And this is why
it's so important
to understand the nature
of the energy field,
because it's the
energy that determines
the nature of who we are.
Field simply means
invisible moving forces that
influence the physical world.
That's really
pretty interesting,
because there's
another word that
has exactly the same
definition, spirit.
Invisible moving forces that
influence the physical world.
Wow.
When quantum physics was
introduced into the world,
it introduced the
nature of spirituality
in the form of a field, it
introduced the nature of us
as energy beings affecting
the energy around us
and being affected by
that energy around us.
And when we
understand this and we
start to pay attention to
those invisible energies, which
include consciousness,
then we're
beginning to understand
why our lives come out
the way they come
out, because it's
the invisible energy that
ultimately shapes our life
experience.
Let's review the
fundamental understanding
of what is happening
in our bodies.
The mechanism that
provides for life
is based on the structure
and the function
of protein molecules.
The assembly of proteins creates
our structure, our anatomy.
The movement of proteins is
due to confirmational changes
in the backbone of the
protein in response
to environmental signals.
In contrast to the
conventional perspective
that life controlling signals
are represented by chemistry
or drugs, quantum
physics reveals
that the most potent controlling
signals are represented
by invisible energy fields.
Examples of
life-controlling signals
include consciousness
and spirituality.
The next episode will
illuminate the mechanism
by which these energy
fields interact
to manifest the good
and bad vibes that shape
the character of our lives.
Thank you for joining me.
I'm your host, Bruce Lipton, for
this series on inner evolution
through biological change.
[MUSIC PLAYING]